Pirates Versus Mercenaries:  

Purely Private Transnational Violence at the Margins of International Law 

Ansel Halliburton 

J.D. Candidate, 2011, UC Davis School of Law 

 

 

Over the last decade, as American and international forces confronted a panoply of 

asymmetric threats from terrorist and insurgent groups, a consensus solidified around the idea 

that states could legitimately use force against certain kinds of violent non-state actors. This 

paper explores the related but quite different question of the legality and legitimacy of non-state 

actors using force against other non-state actors, using as examples the relatively recent increases 

in maritime piracy on the one hand, and in the use of private military companies (PMCs) on the 

other. 

Of course, neither pirates nor mercenaries are new phenomena. In fact, both of these 

kinds of violent non-state actors appear regularly throughout both ancient and modern world 

history. Much as today’s pirates threaten global shipping routes, the Roman Republic—then the 

Western world’s superpower—faced pirates who threatened its food supply. Ultimately, the 

Republic sent its great general Pompey to put an end to the threat.1 Similarly, mercenaries fought 

for the Egyptian Pharaoh in the thirteenth century B.C.E., Greek city-states, the Roman 

Republic, and the empires of both Rome and Byzantium, as well as for the British in the 

American Revolution. The feudal system, which obliged subjects of the sovereign to engage in 

                                                 
1 A.T. Whatley, Historical Sketch of the Law of Piracy, 3 LAW MAG. & REV. 536, 538 (1874); 
Plutarch, Pompey, in 5 PLUTARCH’S LIVES 117, 173–85 (Bernadotte Perrin trans., G.P. Putnam’s 
Sons 1917). 

 

1 

military service, reduced the use of mercenaries somewhat during the Middle Ages.2 The 

Hanseatic League, an quasi-public alliance of Northern-European merchants, formed in part to 

protect maritime trade from Baltic pirates. Some of the League’s earliest legislation set up 

incentives for private attacks on pirates.3 Both piracy and the use of mercenaries decreased 

dramatically during much the 20th century, but surged with the decline of superpower patronage 

after the end of the Cold War. 

This paper posits the questions of how international law would, and should, react to purely 

private transnational violence. It uses a hypothetical offensive by a private military company 

against Somali pirates to both illustrate the relevance of these questions and to help flesh out 

their particulars. 

I.  Factual Background on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia 

 

Somalia has been without a capable government for 19 years, since the collapse of the 

Siad Barre regime in 1991.4 The United Nations-backed Transitional Federal Government 

(“TFG”), although officially recognized by many states, is largely impotent beyond those 

portions of the capital city over which it manages to maintain control. The semi-autonomous 

regional quasi-states of Somaliland and Puntland also exist, print their own currency, and 

maintain their own foreign relations apart from the TFG.5 Although the data are poor, there is 

little doubt that Somalia’s economy is extremely weak, primarily due to the terrible security 

situation. 

                                                 
2 P.W. SINGER, CORPORATE WARRIORS, 20–21 (Cornell U. Press 2003). 
3 Whatley, supra note 1, at 541; Ernst Daenell, The Policy of the German Hanseatic League 
Respecting the Mercantile Marine, 15 AM. HIST. REV. 47 (Oct. 1909), available at 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1835424. 
4 Somalia, CIA WORLD FACTBOOK, Introduction, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-
world-factbook/geos/so.html (last visited March 3, 2010). 
5 Somalia Country Report, ECONOMIST INTELLIGENCE UNIT, February 2010, at 5, 8–9. 

 

2 

One need not go far to find headlines about hijackings off the coast of Somalia. Stories in 

the press give a lurid picture of a new scourge upon the sea. However, it is important to 

understand the scale of piracy compared to the total volume of shipping in the area. Of 21,000 

ships transiting the Gulf of Aden, 0.6% were attacked, and just 0.2% were boarded by pirates.6 

Somali piracy is no doubt a serious problem, but international commerce is at no risk of grinding 

to a halt. 

A.  The Human Cost of Somali Piracy 

Data from the International Maritime Organization (IMO), although incomplete because 

submissions are voluntary, gives a partial picture of Somali piracy’s human impact. In 134 

reported attacks in waters off East Africa in 2008, 44 ships were hijacked, one crew member was 

killed, two were wounded, 8 crew members were missing, and 703 crew members were taken 

hostage.7 Although the figure of 700 hostages is stunning, the low number of injuries and deaths 

takes away much of the force of popular reporting on the scale of the threat. 

The human cost of contemporary Somali piracy is also slight in comparative and 

historical terms. Just after its founding, the United States faced a far more serious and sadistic 

threat from the Barbary Corsairs, who frequently tortured, enslaved, or killed captured sailors.8 

Contemporary piracy in the South China Sea is far more violent than that off the coast of 

Somalia: in 2008, 4 crew were killed, 10 were wounded, and 30 went missing in the South China 

                                                 
6 Raymond Gilpin, Counting the Costs of Somali Piracy 12 (U.S. Inst. Peace, Working Paper, 
2009), available at http://www.usip.org/resources/counting-the-costs-somali-piracy. 
7 IMO, Reports on Acts of Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Ships, Annual Report, 2008, 
Annex 2, MSC.4/Circ.133 (Mar. 19, 2009), available at 
http://www.imo.org/includes/blastData.asp/doc_id=11376/133.pdf [hereinafter IMO 2008 
Annual Report] 
8 Brief of Lawrence M. Friedman, et al., as Amici Curiae in Support of Petitioner at 9, Hamdan 
v. Rumsfeld, 2006 WL 53971 (U.S. Jan. 6, 2006) (No. 05-184) [hereinafter Hamdan Amicus 
Brief]. 

 

3 

Sea as a result of 62 reported incidents; of 84 reported incidents in East Africa and the Indian 

Ocean, however, one crewmember was killed, 2 were wounded, and 8 went missing.9 

B.  The Economic Costs of Somali Piracy 

Despite its relatively small human impact, piracy exacts a significant economic toll. The 

economic cost of piracy can be divided into the following categories: ransom payments, 

increased insurance premiums, indirect economic costs, the cost of deploying naval forces to the 

area, and, in a more recent trend, the cost of providing armed security teams aboard ships. 

i.  Ransoms 

 

Because insurers and shippers typically do not disclose the amounts of ransom payments, 

or even the fact of their payment, it is only possible to give rough estimates. The most widely-

cited estimates of aggregate ransom payments to Somali pirates are $60–80 million in 2008 and 

$150 million in 2009.10 The available evidence tends to indicate a trend toward more 

sophisticated operations resulting in seizures of larger, more valuable ships, with larger ransom 

demands and payments per ship. 

ii.  Avoidance 

Most of the ships attacked by Somali pirates are commercial shipping vessels sailing 

between continents. The only way to assure avoiding piracy in the Gulf of Aden and Indian 

Ocean is to avoid those areas entirely—usually by re-routing ships around the Cape of Good 

Hope instead of through the Suez Canal. The U.S. Department of Transportation’s Maritime 

Administration estimates that diverting one tanker’s normal route between Saudi Arabia and the 

                                                 
9 IMO 2008 Annual Report, supra note 7, at 15. 
10 Donors pledge over $250 million for Somalia, USA TODAY, Apr. 23, 2009, 
http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2009-04-23-somalia-donors_N.htm; Q&A: Somali 
piracy, BBC NEWS,  Nov. 2, 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7734985.stm. 

 

4 

United States around the Cape of Good Hope would add $3.5 million per year in additional fuel 

costs while cutting its delivery capacity by 26%.11 

iii.  Insurance 

In 2008 alone, the cost of additional war-risk insurance for a ship’s passage through the 

Gulf of Aden rose from $500 to $20,000 per trip. Applied to the 21,000 ships transiting the Gulf 

annually, the total annual cost to insure these ships could be as high as $400 million.12 To the 

extent this represents a new revenue source for insurers and is greater than their overall payouts, 

insurers may prefer the status quo to stronger anti-piracy measures. One would therefore expect 

demands for stronger protection to come from the shippers themselves, as has mostly been the 

case. 

iv.  Indirect Economic Costs 

Piracy imposes other indirect economic costs. For example, whenever a ship avoids the 

Gulf of Aden by re-routing around the Cape of Good Hope, Egypt loses out on revenue from the 

Suez Canal, the second-most central port in the global shipping network.13  

v.  Unarmed Defensive Measures 

In 2009, the IMO promulgated a set of “best management practices” for avoiding and 

repelling pirate attacks.14 The recommendations include coordinating transits with military 

                                                 
11 Maritime Administration, Economic Impact of Piracy in the Gulf of Aden on Global Trade. 
12 Id. 
13 Pablo Kaluza et al., The complex network of global cargo ship movements, J. ROYAL SOC. 
INTERFACE (Jan. 19, 2010) (analysis of 2007 global shipping traffic); Gilpin, supra note 6, at 11, 
citing Louis Wasser, Somalia Piracy Costs Suez Canal Business, S.F. CHRON., 29 Apr. 2009 
(projecting $1.5 billion decrease in Suez Canal revenue over two years). Because Suez is 
primarily a transit point, not a primary shipping destination itself, canal revenue is entirely lost 
rather than redistributed to other ports if ships route around it on their way to their destinations. 
14 IMO, Best Management Practices to Deter Piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off the Coast of 
Somalia developed by the industry, Maritime Safety Committee Circular MSC.1/Circ.1335 (Sep. 
29, 2009) [hereinafter Best Practices]. 

 

5 

vessels in the area, pressurizing fire hoses with which to hit attacking pirates, and posting more 

lookouts.15 Other defensive measures include “greasing or electrifying of hand rails and the 

installation of barbed wire in vulnerable parts of ships.”16 More sophisticated equipment has also 

been employed with mixed success. One non-lethal device, the long-rage acoustical device 

(“LRAD”)—which sells for over $20,000—emits directionally-focused and painfully-loud sound 

as one way to deter approach by potential attackers.17 However, after a few initial successes 

against pirates, the LRAD has since proven ineffective.18 After using an LRAD to no effect, one 

British security guard said, “We thought it would make the pirates back off, but they just 

laughed. It was a total waste of time.”19 Another as-yet unproven non-lethal measure on the 

market is a set of polypropylene rope nets called Propeller Arresters, which are even more 

expensive than the LRAD. The company marketing the system claims that a set of Propeller 

Arrestors, laid out around a ship’s perimeter, will tangle the propellers of approaching boats to 

stop and deter pirate attacks.20 In sum, although there are several documented instances of non-

                                                 
15 Id. at 6–10. 
16 Carolin Liss, Privatising Anti-Piracy Services in Strategically Important Waterways: Risks, 
Challenges and Benefits, 6, (University of Tokyo, GraSPP Discussion Paper E-09-003, Oct. 
2009). 
17 LRAD Corporation, Maritime Applications, http://www.lradx.com/site/content/view/287/110 
(last visited May 25, 2010). Tracy V. Wilson, How LRAD Works, HOWSTUFFWORKS.COM, 
http://science.howstuffworks.com/lrad2.htm (last visited May 25, 2010). 
18 Sam Gustin, High-tech letdown: Somali pirates repelled by bullets, not soundwaves, DAILY 
FINANCE, Nov. 18, 2009, http://www.dailyfinance.com/story/company-news/high-tech-letdown-
somali-pirates-repelled-by-bullets-not-sound/19245428/; James Kraska and Brian Wilson, Piracy 
Repression, Partnering and the Law, 40 J. MAR. L. COM. 43 (2009), fn. 12, citing Rod Nordland, 
NEWSWEEK, Dec. 2008 (quoting pirate as saying “For those with the sonic guns, we hijacked 
some of them even after they fired the sonic guns.”). 
19 Susie Boniface, Heroic Brit trio take on Somali pirates before escaping into sea, THE DAILY 
MIRROR, Jul. 12, 2008, http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/top-stories/2008/12/07/heroic-brit-trio-
take-on-somali-pirates-before-escaping-into-sea-115875-20951441/. 
20 Merchant Maritime Warfare Centre, Propeller Arresters, 
http://www.mmwc.org/propeller_arresters.php (last visited May 25, 2010). 

 

6 

lethal defenses stopping pirate attacks, Somali pirates have proven to be determined adversaries 

capable of overcoming any such defenses employed thus far. 

vi.  Armed Security 

Recently, shippers have begun to place armed guards aboard vessels transiting the Gulf of 

Aden and western Indian Ocean. In some instances, shipping companies contract with private 

security companies to provide such guards. Some states have also provided military personnel to 

protect ships sailing under their flags. For example, France—which has taken an aggressive 

stance against piracy generally—has provided teams of marines to French fishing vessels.21 

Hiring private armed guards costs approximately $40,000–$60,000 per voyage.22 The cost of 

providing armed security is substantial, and, when combined with the simultaneous increase in 

insurance premiums, imposes a substantial burden on ship owners. 

vii.  Military Response 

 

The European Union’s high-profile combined naval operation, EU NAVFOR (also called 

Atalanta), had a budget of €8.3 million for 2009, its first year.23 However, this figure does not 

include any of the costs of the military personnel and equipment used, which are borne 

individually by the contributing states. Taking those costs into account, one analyst estimates the 

total cost of the European operation at upwards of $300 million for one year.24 

 

Although difficult to quantify accurately, the aggregate economic costs of Somali piracy 

likely run into the billions of dollars,25 with some estimates as high as $16 billion per year.26 In 

                                                 
21 French marines repel new pirate attack on trawlers, AFP, Oct. 13, 2009. 
22 Peter T. Leeson, Piracy, Economics, and the Law, 8 CIP REPORT 7, 2009. 
23 Mission, EU NAVFOR Somalia, http://www.eunavfor.eu/about-us/mission/ (last visited May 
25, 2010) 
24 J. Peter Pham, Countering Somali Piracy by Involving the Private Sector, WORLD DEF. REV., 
Apr. 30, 2009 (estimating one-year total cost of EU operation at “over $300 million”). 
25 Gilpin, supra note 6, at 12. 

 

7 

historical context, however, this cost is slight. At the beginning of the 19th century, the United 

States paid out a substantial portion of its treasury in tribute to the Barbary powers.27 As a very 

rough point of comparison, the EU NAVFOR operation consumes merely 0.002% of the EU’s 

budget, or 0.00002% of the EU’s combined $14.5 trillion gross product.28 

II.  Deterring Piracy: Risk and Reward 

The scale and sophistication of Somali pirate operations—often involving extended 

voyages, multiple fast boats deployed from larger “motherships,” and an organized investment 

market29—show that today’s pirates are sophisticated and rational economic actors. They are not, 

as some press reports portray them, merely khat-chewing petty criminals acting on impulse.30 As 

with any other economic activity, these business associations have emerged because the 

participants perceive piracy’s rewards to outweigh its risks. 

At a higher level of abstraction, maritime piracy, like any other criminal activity, can be 

reduced by either diversion, deterrence, or incapacitation. These options themselves depend on 

changing potential pirates’ perceptions of risks, rewards, and opportunities. Diversion operates 

by providing alternative opportunities with acceptable rewards and less risk than the offense. 

Deterrence increases the perceived risk of the offense. Incapacitation removes the opportunity 

                                                 
26 Jeni Bone, Piracy costs maritime industry $16bn+, Maritime Business News, Aug. 23, 2008, 
http://www.marinebusiness-world.com/index.cfm?nid=48105. 
27 U.S. Census Bureau, HISTORICAL STATISTICS OF THE UNITED STATES, 1789–1945, available at 
http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/past_years.html. 
28 European Union, CIA WORLD FACTBOOK, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/ee.html (last visited Apr. 14, 2010); European Union, Budget, 
http://europa.eu/pol/financ/index_en.htm (last visited Apr. 14, 2010). 
29 Mohamed Ahmed, Somali sea gangs lure investors at pirate lair, REUTERS, Dec. 1, 2009, 
http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE5B01Z920091201?sp=true (describing “stock 
exchange” for investing in piracy in Haradheere, Somalia); Gilpin, supra note 6, at 8–9 
(describing mode of operation based on multiple skiffs and larger motherships) 
30 Robyn Hunter, Somali pirates living the high life, BBC NEWS, Oct. 28, 2008, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/7650415.stm. 

 

8 

entirely by restricting the actor’s ability to commit the offense by, for example, putting him in 

jail.31 

A.  Diversion 

Somalia’s ruined economy presents few compelling alternatives to piracy. Most of the 

country’s economy is based on agriculture and remittances from abroad, and its per-capita GDP 

is estimated at $600—the fifth-lowest in the world.32 In contrast, one conservative analysis 

estimates an average individual pirate could expect to earn $15,000 for a year’s work.33 Lucky 

participants in a multi-million dollar ransom stand to earn far more. 

One justification pirates often claim for their actions is to expel foreign fishing vessels 

operating illegally in Somali waters. At one point, such poaching was a serious problem, and 

overfishing by foreign vessels led to a significant depletion of certain fish stocks. Today, 

although piracy has largely driven foreign fishing vessels away from Somalia and deep into the 

Indian Ocean, pirates have continued to ply their new trade instead of returning to fishing—

presumably because it is far more lucrative.34 

Some authors advocate co-opting pirates into a legitimate coast guard under TFG 

auspices. However, given the TFG pays its nascent coast guard recruits under $750 per year, few 

pirates are likely to opt for a government job when they stand to earn twenty times that salary as 

pirates.35 “High profits with low costs and little risk of consequences in a failed and starving 

                                                 
31 JOSHUA DRESSLER, UNDERSTANDING CRIMINAL LAW 15 (LexisNexis 2006) (discussing 
“general deterrence,” and incapacitation as a species of “specific deterrence”). 
32 Somalia, CIA WORLD FACTBOOK, supra note 4. 
33 Gilpin, supra note 6, at 9–11. 
34 Somalia Country Report, supra note 5, at 8. 
35 Will Ross, Somali navy chief: World’s worst job?, BBC NEWS, Jun. 16, 2009, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8096137.stm. 

 

9 

State ensure that Somali pirate groups have almost unlimited human resources and do not lack 

for recruits and support.”36 

Development of the Somali economy is the international community’s best hope for 

diverting pirates away from crime. This is, however, a long term goal with little prospect of near-

term realization.37 

B.  Deterrence 

International military efforts off the coast of Somalia focus on deterring piracy through a 

strong military presence protecting designated shipping lanes.38 Despite the impressive array of 

international cooperation and naval firepower, pirate attacks in the region have simply shifted 

outward into the Indian Ocean and beyond the easy reach of international patrols. Deterrence is 

further hampered by the frequent failure to prosecute those pirates who are captured by naval 

forces—a policy derided as “catch and release.”39 States have advanced several justifications for 

their refusals to prosecute suspected pirates, including cost and fears that pirates will claim 

                                                 
36 NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL, COUNTERING PIRACY OFF THE HORN OF AFRICA: PARTNERSHIP 
& ACTION PLAN (Dec. 2008), 
http://www.marad.dot.gov/documents/Countering_Piracy_Off_The_Horn_of_Africa_-
_Partnership__Action_Plan.pdf. 
37 But see Peter T. Leeson, Better Off Stateless: Somalia Before and After Government Collapse, 
35 J. COMP. ECON. 689 (2007) (noting improvements to indicia of economic and human 
development after collapse of central government). 
38 EU NAVFOR Somalia, Mission, supra note 23 (describing the mission of the European 
Union’s joint naval operation as “to help deter, prevent and repress acts of piracy and armed 
robbery off the coast of Somalia”); New Counter-Piracy Task Force Established, US NAVY, 
January 8, 2009, http://www.navy.mil/Search/display.asp?story_id=41687 (quoting US 
commander of international naval task force, describing its mission as “deterring, disrupting and 
eventually bringing to justice the maritime criminals involved in piracy events”). 
39 See, e.g., EU force frees Somali “pirates”, BBC NEWS, Mar. 25, 2010, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8586729.stm (six pirates released by EU NAVFOR one day 
after their capture); S.C. Res. 1918, 2, U.N. Doc. S/RES/1918 (Apr. 27, 2010) (noting “cases 
when persons suspected of piracy are released without facing justice”). 

 

10 

asylum once released.40 Most of the pirates now facing prosecution were turned over to Kenyan 

authorities, who have since refused to take any more cases.41 Piracy has not subsided since the 

multinational armada arrived on the scene, and insignificantly few pirates have been brought to 

justice. Despite the hundreds of millions of dollars the international community has spent to fight 

them, pirates still have little to fear. The international community’s current approach has failed to 

create sufficient risk to deter pirates. 

C.  Incapacitation 

As discussed above, the pattern of “catch-and-release” seriously impairs naval forces’ 

ability to incapacitate pirates by putting them on trial and into prison. The less savory alternative, 

of course, is to kill them instead. Before the birth of modern human-rights law, this had been the 

standard way of dealing with pirates in much of the world, and many now advocate its return.42 

Because of Somalia’s poor long-term economic and social prospects, any incapacitation 

through violence would be only temporary, as new recruits with little to lose and everything to 

gain would be attracted to piracy for the same basic economic reasons as current pirates. 

However, because Somalia’s most active pirates operate in identified clan-based organizations, a 

concerted effort to incapacitate all the major pirate gangs simultaneously could likely set back 

piracy in the region substantially, because reconstituting the experience and operational capacity 

of the organizations would take some time. A concerted violent effort at incapacitation is likely 

to be only temporary; however, absent an enduring solution to Somalia’s political problems, it 

                                                 
40 Bruno Waterfield, Somali pirates embrace capture as route to Europe, TELEGRAPH.CO.UK, 
May 19, 2009, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/piracy/5350183/Somali-pirates-
embrace-capture-as-route-to-Europe.html. 
41 Kenya ends trials of Somali pirates in its courts, BBC NEWS, Apr. 1, 2010, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8599347.stm. 
42 Sandeep Gopalan, Put Pirates to the Sword, WALL ST. J., Jan. 18, 2010. 

 

11 

could well be more effective, and cheaper, than the current approach, which is almost entirely 

defensive and reactive. 

D.  Incentives Toward Offense 

Fundamentally, deterring maritime piracy boils down to altering pirates’ risk-reward 

assessments. Unfortunately, pirates’ hostages serve dual purposes: they are both bargaining chips 

for ransom negotiations and human shields used to dissuade attempts to recover ships by force. 

The presence of innocent hostages makes retaking a hijacked vessel by force infeasible in most 

circumstances, although it has been done successfully in a small number of instances. French 

forces, for example, have staged at least three rescues; one resulted in the death of a hostage.43 

Hostages are indeed pirates’ most powerful bargaining chips, which allow them to negotiate and 

obtain large ransom payments with little threat of reprisal.44 Therefore, reducing the expected 

reward for hijacking a ship is essentially impossible. Because of this threat to innocent human 

life, counter-piracy strategy should focus on increasing the risk to pirates outside the context of 

                                                 
43 French commandos storm yacht held by pirates, one hostage killed, TELEGRAPH.CO.UK, Apr. 
10, 2009, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/piracy/5137861/French-commandos-
storm-yacht-held-by-pirates-one-hostage-killed.html. One maritime security recommendation, 
creating hardened “safe rooms” for crew to retreat to during a pirate attack, best preserves the 
military option, as demonstrated by the Russian recapture of a pirated ship whose crew avoided 
being taken hostage by using such a room. Tony Halpin, Russian special forces storm oil tanker, 
arrest Somali pirates, THE TIMES ONLINE, May 7, 2010, 
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/africa/article7117736.ece. Ironically, Russia 
released the pirates the next day, citing a lack of a legal framework for their prosecution. Freed 
Somali pirates “probably died” – Russian source, BBC NEWS, May 11, 2010, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8675978.stm. 
44 If merchant ships were unmanned, for example, military responses would be far more 
palatable and likely. In comparison, the U.S. military leads a trend of replacing manned aircraft 
with unmanned aircraft which can be used without fear of killing any crew. For example, the 
U.S. now operates the nearly fully autonomous Global Hawk aircraft, which will eventually 
replace the manned U-2 made famous for being shot down over the Soviet Union during the 
Cold War. P.W. SINGER, WIRED FOR WAR 36 (Penguin Books 2009). 

 

12 

any ongoing hijacking or ransom negotiation: any effective action against pirates must be 

proactive, not reactive. 

 

Initially, the shipping industry responded to Somali piracy by promulgating best practices 

such as avoiding areas of known recent pirate activity, sailing at greater speed through high-risk 

areas, coordinating transits with military commanders, using specially designated routes with 

warship escorts, and improving reporting of attacks,45 which remains poor.46  

More recently, shippers have begun placing armed guards on vessels, some of whom 

have fired on pirates. Although it is too early to say to what extent arming the vessels will deter 

pirate attacks, it seems reasonable to expect some reaction from the pirates—perhaps simply by 

increasing their ransom demands to internalize their increased risk. 

Although the shipping industry has public and private mechanisms for reporting pirate 

attacks, even this most basic tool is greatly underutilized because of perceived fear of insurers 

raising their premiums, pirates retaliating, and other reasons. Perhaps less surprisingly, the 

insurance industry turned the surge in piracy into a profit center by selling new forms of “kidnap 

and ransom” insurance.47 

Even insurers, however, appear to be reaching the conclusion that the status quo cannot 

last forever. One major maritime shipping insurer with historical ties to the Opium Wars48 has 

                                                 
45 Best Practices, supra note 14; About the Maritime Security Centre-Horn of Africa, 
http://www.mschoa.org/About.aspx (last visited Apr. 15, 2010). 
46 Elizabeth Andersen, et al., Suppressing Maritime Piracy: Exploring the Options in 
International Law (Am. Soc. Int’l L. Workshop Report, 2010) (“It is widely believed that as 
many as 50 percent of pirate attacks are not reported, due to shipowners’ fears that doing so will 
increase insurance premiums and result in costly post-incident investigations.”). 
47 Myles Neligan and Lorraine Turner, Piracy premiums take a breather but menace remains, 
REUTERS, Apr. 1, 2010, http://uk.reuters.com/article/idUKLNE63001I20100401?sp=true. 
48 William Kay, China House rides the economic dragon, THE INDEPENDENT, Jun. 20, 2001, 
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/china-house-rides-the-economic-dragon-
674714.html. 

 

13 

proposed funding a private navy to patrol the Somali coast, signaling its belief that both the 

international naval efforts, as well as efforts to build up the TFG’s capacity, are insufficient to 

protect its interests.49 

An offensive campaign against Somali pirates—who lack sophisticated weapons systems 

and military-style command and control—might be relatively inexpensive. With good targeting 

information, a small force could strike the main Somali pirate havens, kill key figures in the 

major pirate networks, and then leave the country quickly. Although the operation might only 

incapacitate organized piracy for a short time, it would create a much stronger deterrent effect 

than either the multinational naval effort or piecemeal prosecutions have achieved. 

A direct attack against pirates on land would, of course, be wildly unpopular within 

Somalia. One analyst warns that an attack on land “would lead to ‘the dangerous politicization 

(and radicalization) of what has hitherto remained a purely economic phenomenon.’”50 This 

might explain why states have been reluctant to take this path, even though the UN Security 

Council has authorized them to do so.51 Land attacks by foreigners which could jeopardize 

Somalia’s precarious political situation are, therefore, likely off the table for states. Private 

actors, however, have few such concerns: the political cost is an externality about which a hull 

insurer tired of paying ransoms is unlikely to care.  

In short, all these factors point to the likelihood that private, non-state actors could soon 

take the Somali piracy problem into their own hands by hiring private military companies to 

                                                 
49 Neligan, supra note 47. 
50 Christopher Helman, The Profits Of Piracy, FORBES.COM, Apr. 15, 2010, 
http://www.forbes.com/2010/04/15/pirates-somalia-shipping-insurance-business-logistics-
piracy.html. 
51 S.C. Res. 1846, U.N. Doc. S/RES/1846 (Dec. 2, 2008). 

 

14 

conduct offensive attacks against known pirate networks. This remainder of this paper addresses 

the question of what the law would and should do with such a situation. 

III. The Return of Private Military Force 

Several conflicts in the last two decades demonstrate that offensive operations by private 

military companies can be surprisingly effective and inexpensive compared to other approaches. 

For example, in 1993, the government of Angola signed a $40 million contract with 

Executive Outcomes.52 In one year, the firm reconstituted and trained a 5,000-strong Angolan 

army brigade, brought in former Soviet aircrews to maintain and fly aircraft the country lacked 

the expertise to operate itself, and fielded its own special-operations forces.53 The firm then 

commanded these joint public-private forces in an offensive that quickly brought the UNITA 

rebels, which the Angolan government had been fighting for two decades, to the negotiating 

table.54 

In early 1997, the government of Papua New Guinea (PNG) signed a contract with 

another private military company, Sandline, for a military campaign to destroy the rebel 

Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA).55 The contract contemplated a 16-man command, and 

54 additional soldiers, 4 ex-Soviet attack helicopters, electronic warfare equipment, 150 firearms 

and other weapons, and hundreds of thousands of rounds of ammunition.56 The principal 

objectives of the contract were to destroy the BRA’s military capability and to retake a strategic 

mine. Sandline was to train PNG soldiers, and to engage directly in combat with the BRA, 

including commanding PNG forces and operating aircraft. Sandline’s employees would be 

                                                 
52 Singer, supra note 2, at 107–10. 
53 Id. 
54 Id. 
55 Id. at 245–54. 
56 Id. at 246–48, 253–54. 

 

15 

enrolled as “Special Constables” in the PNG military—a convenient means around classification 

as “mercenaries” under the Geneva Protocol I definition, which excepts members of a state’s 

military.57 

Singer’s three-tiered typology for characterizing firms in the private military industry is 

used widely in the literature. The first category, military provider firms, engage in direct 

command or combat. Executive Outcomes and Sandline are leading examples.58 The second 

category, military consultant firms, are far more common today. These firms offer training to 

host state militaries, but do not themselves engage in combat. MPRI, now a subsidiary of 

publicly-held L-3 Communications, is a typical military consultant firm.59 The third category, 

military support firms, provide logistical support to militaries, but do not train them or engage in 

combat.60 This paper is concerned primarily with military provider firms. 

IV. Law and Private Transnational Violence 

Both domestic and international law may apply to incidents of transnational violence 

between non-state actors.61 As will be demonstrated, public international law, which has focused 

primarily on states, is not well-equipped to deal with this form of violence, which does not fit the 

                                                 
57 See Part IV.C, infra, and id. at 249; Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 
August 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts 
(Protocol I) art. 47(2)(e), Jun. 8, 1977, 1125 U.N.T.S. 3, 16 I.L.M. 1391 [hereinafter Protocol I]. 
Note, however, that by explicitly integrating PMC fighters into a state’s military, the state will 
likely responsibility for those fighters’ actions. See Military and Paramilitary Activities (Nicar. v. 
U.S.), 1986 I.C.J. 14 (June 27) (finding U.S. responsible for rebels’ actions against Nicaraguan 
government). See also David Turns, Implementation and compliance, in PERSPECTIVES ON THE 
ICRC STUDY ON CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW 364–65 (Elizabeth 
Wilmshurst and Susan Breau eds., Cambridge U. Press 2007). 
58 Singer, supra note 2, at 92–95. 
59 Id. at 95–97. 
60 Id. at 97–100. 
61 Contrast, for example, the “war on terror,” in which both states, such as the U.S., and non-state 
actors, such as Al Qaeda, are in conflict. 

 

16 

existing legal frameworks for armed conflict. The following sections evaluate specific 

instruments and bodies of law that may apply to private transnational violence. 

A.  UN Charter 

The United Nations Charter, like most multilateral treaties, binds only signatory states;62 

it has no direct application to private actors. Therefore, Article 2(4)’s prohibition on the use of 

force applies only to states.63 

However, the Charter does contemplate a broad role for the UN and its member states in 

establishing and keeping peace. The Charter does not bar the UN or its member states from 

acting against non-state actors if they threaten international peace and security. For example, 

Chapter VII, which empowers the Security Council to authorize force, does not specify whether 

the targets of its action must be states. The Security Council has in several instances authorized 

force against non-state actors under Chapter VII, most notably against Al Qaeda after 9/11,64 and 

more recently against Somali pirates.65 Where Al Qaeda’s threat to international peace and 

security is apparent, this is less clear for piracy. Although the Security Council has not stated 

explicitly whether piracy itself is sufficient to act under Chapter VII, in its more limited action to 

encourage criminal prosecution of pirates, the Council did not cite Chapter VII.66 

                                                 
62 “Accordingly, our respective Governments…have agreed to the present Charter of the United 
Nations and do hereby establish an international organization to be known as the United 
Nations.” U.N. Charter, preamble. 
63 “The [U.N.] and its Members…shall act in accordance with the following Principles…” Id. art. 
2. “Members” are defined as states. Id. arts. 3, 110. 
64 S.C. Res. 1373, U.N. Doc. S/RES/1373 (Sept. 28, 2001) (reacting to 9/11 attacks under 
Chapter VII to suppress terrorism by non-state actors). 
65 S.C. Res. 1846, supra note 51 (allowing warships entry into Somali territorial waters for anti-
piracy operations); S.C. Res. 1851, U.N. Doc. S/RES/1851 (Dec. 16, 2008) (endorsing 
cooperation between states); S.C. Res. 1897, U.N. Doc. S/RES/1897 (Nov. 30, 2009) (extending 
mandate for naval operations). Each resolution notes that piracy is one aspect of Somalia’s 
security problems. 
66 S.C. Res. 1918, U.N. Doc. S/RES/1918 (Apr. 27, 2010). 

 

17 

Article 2(7) provides further support for UN action against private actors. Article 2(7) 

generally exempts domestic matters from UN intervention. However, it expressly allows 

“enforcement measures under Chapter VII” in the context of domestic conflict.67 Presumably, 

transnational violence by non-state actors would fall within this exception. In fact, the Security 

Council’s authority under Chapter VII extends to purely domestic violence between non-state 

actors if it constitutes a “threat to the peace.”68  

In sum, although the UN Charter does not directly prohibit private transnational violence 

in the same explicit terms in which it prohibits violence between states, it does provide a means 

for states to act against it. 

B.  Law of the Sea 

The law of the sea provides clearer results for private violence than does general 

international law. Two principal treaties define piracy and related offenses: the United Nations 

Convention on the Law of the Sea69 (“UNCLOS”) and the Convention for the Suppression of 

Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation70 (“SUA Convention”). Applying 

these treaties, the sea component of any attack against pirates by other private actors would 

likely constitute piracy or a related SUA offense.  

                                                 
67 “Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in 
matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any state or shall require the 
Members to submit such matters to settlement under the present Charter; but this principle shall 
not prejudice the application of enforcement measures under Chapter VII.” U.N. Charter art. 
2(7). 
68 Prosecutor v. Tadic, Case No. IT-94-1-I, Decision on the Defence Motion for Interlocutory 
Appeal on Jurisdiction, ¶ 30, (Oct. 2, 1995) (noting “settled practice” of the Security Council and 
“common understanding” that “internal armed conflicts” are actionable under Chapter VII if they 
constitute a “threat to the peace”). 
69 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Dec. 10, 1982, 1833 U.N.T.S. 3, 21 I.L.M. 
1261 [hereinafter UNCLOS]. 
70 Convention and Protocol from the International Conference on the Suppression of Unlawful 
Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, Mar. 10, 1988, 27 I.L.M. 668 [hereinafter SUA 
Convention]. 

 

18 

Article 101 of UNCLOS defines piracy as “any illegal acts of violence…committed for 

private ends…on the high seas…[or] outside the jurisdiction of any State,” or any voluntary 

participation in such violence. Under the scenario presented, offensive attacks against pirates 

would clearly be “acts of violence…committed for private ends.”  

Article 107 provides further guidance by giving the right to interdict pirate ships 

exclusively to military vessels “or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being 

on government service and authorized to that effect.”71 Therefore, any attack by private forces on 

the high seas—even an attack against pirates—is piracy under UNCLOS unless a state has 

explicitly and visibly authorized the attacking ship. 

Similarly, the SUA Convention creates a criminal offense for anyone who “performs an 

act of violence against a person on board a ship if that act is likely to endanger the safe 

navigation of that ship,” but also exempts state forces from liability.72 As with UNCLOS, any 

attack other than in self-defense within the SUA Convention’s jurisdiction is a crime, even if 

committed against pirates.  

Matters are further complicated by states’ adoption of these treaties. UNCLOS has been 

adopted by 160 states,73 and SUA by 156.74 The U.S. has adopted SUA, but not UNCLOS—

although it has adopted the earlier Convention on the High Seas, which is substantially similar, 

especially in its piracy provisions.75 Under the Siad Barre regime, Somalia adopted UNCLOS, 

                                                 
71 UNCLOS, supra note 69, art. 107. 
72 SUA Convention, supra note 70, art. 3(1)(b). 
73 U.N. Treaty Collection, United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,  
http://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetailsIII.aspx?&src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXI~6&chapter=2
1&Temp=mtdsg3&lang=en (last visited May 26, 2010) 
74 IMO, Status of Conventions, http://www.imo.org/Conventions/mainframe.asp?topic_id=247 
(last visited May 26, 2010). 
75 Convention on the High Seas, Apr. 29, 1958, 450 U.N.T.S. 82. 

 

19 

but neither the old regime nor the TFG has adopted SUA.76 The UN Security Council has 

attempted to smooth over some of these difficulties by promoting the use of SUA and UNCLOS, 

and encouraging more states to adopt SUA and the Transnational Organized Crime convention 

(discussed below). Further, piracy is among the few specific crimes prohibited by the law of 

nations, and for which universal jurisdiction is generally recognized.77 Given the universally 

criminal nature of piracy, Somalia’s failed-state status, and UN Security Council resolutions 

authorizing states to intrude into its territorial waters (albeit with the TFG’s express consent), 

then, for practical purposes, whether an attack occurs within or without Somalia’s territorial 

waters has little relevance. The principal question, then, is whether these private acts of violence 

are “illegal.” 

C.  International Law’s Weak Prohibition of Mercenarism 

A report to the U.K. House of Commons (the Green Paper) explains why “mercenary” is 

such a loaded term: “In modern times mercenaries have a bad reputation, so much so that the 

word has become almost a form of abuse. This is based partly on the experience of the 60s and 

70s when, starting with the Congo, mercenaries were associated with instability and secessionist 

movements. They were also involved both in a number of attempted coups and in human rights 

abuses.”78  

The international community reacted to what it perceived as a trend in illegitimate private 

violence, and advanced several treaties purporting to prohibit mercenary activity. However, their 

                                                 
76 IMO, Status of Conventions by Country, 
http://www.imo.org/Conventions/mainframe.asp?topic_id=248 (last visited May 26, 2010). 
77 Eugene Kantorovich, “A Guantanamo on the Sea”: The Difficulties of Prosecuting Pirates and 
Terrorists, 98 CAL. L. REV. 243, 251, n.61 (2010). 
78 FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH OFFICE, PRIVATE MILITARY COMPANIES: OPTIONS FOR 
REGULATION, 2001–02, H.C. 577, 14 at ¶ 32 (footnote omitted) [hereinafter Green Paper]. 

 

20 

shortcomings are many and well documented.79 The common key flaw of these instruments is 

that they focus too narrowly on specific instances of abuse, and fail to take a broader historical 

view of private military activity. 

As discussed below,80 most of the protections of the Geneva Conventions, including 

Protocol I, extend only to international armed conflict, i.e., war between states.81 Because 

mercenaries are so often employed in internal armed conflict, this has the effect of gutting the 

Protocol’s prohibition on mercenarism of a great deal of its potential effect. Further, a study by 

the British House of Commons notes the ease of evading the Protocol I definition by skillful 

contracting. For example, Sandline’s 1997 contract with Papua New Guinea specified that its 

employees would be enrolled in the PNG military, thus easily satisfying Geneva Protocol I’s 

exception for “member[s] of the armed forces of a Party to the conflict.”82  

The UN’s International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training 

of Mercenaries (“Mercenary Convention”) is similarly narrowly tailored to the unique events in 

Africa in the mid-20th century. It is entirely useless in the context of purely private international 

violence because it prohibits only the use of mercenaries by or against states in armed conflict.83 

The Mercenary Convention is also largely hamstrung by its lack of meaningful adoption—only 

                                                 
79 Id. at 9, ¶ 16 (concluding that “The internationally agreed definitions have been shaped to suit 
the agendas of those drafting them and are not necessarily very useful”). 
80 See infra Part IV.G. 
81 Protocol I, supra note 57, art. 1(3), citing Common Article 2 of the original Geneva 
Conventions (defining scope of Conventions to be “all cases of declared war or any other armed 
conflict which may arise between two or more [states]”), see infra note 112. 
82 Protocol I, supra note 57, art. 47(2)(e). Note, however, that Protocol I would not have applied 
to the PNG conflict because it was not international in nature. 
83 International Convention Against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of 
Mercenaries art. 1, G.A. Res. 44/34, U.N. Doc. A/44/34 (Dec. 4, 1989) [hereinafter “Mercenary 
Convention”]. 

 

21 

32 states have joined the treaty, and none of the major sources of private military talent are 

parties.84 

 

The Green Paper notes similar problems with the OAU’s Convention for the Elimination 

of Mercenarism in Africa. The OAU’s definition is drawn narrowly to target only mercenaries 

working against an OAU member state or OAU-recognized national liberation movement.85 

Therefore, it would have allowed both of the controversial PMC deployments by Executive 

Outcomes in Sierra Leone and Angola merely because they were sponsored by an OAU member 

state.86 Because PMC attacks on pirates target neither states nor revolutionary movements, they 

too would fall outside both the OAU and Mercenary Convention definitions. 

 

Percy, however, finds another explanation for the weakness of international law’s 

prohibition against mercenaries. She argues that “weak law can be the result of strong norms,”87 

and, in the case of the Article 47 and the Mercenary Convention, that states created weak law 

because “[s]tates were so committed to the anti-mercenary norm that they refused to dilute it or 

adjust it in any way during the lawmaking process, resulting in law that precisely reflects the 

norm but is legally flawed.”88 According to Percy, mercenaries are objectionable for two main 

reasons: (1) because they “lie outside state control and so pose both a practical threat to states 

and a threat to the normative idea that states ought to have a monopoly on the use of force”, and 

(2) because their motive to fight—financial gain—is illegitimate as compared to others, who 

                                                 
84 ICRC, International Humanitarian Law – UN Convention on Mercenaries 1989, 
http://www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/INTRO/530?OpenDocument (last visited June 10, 2010). 
85 OAU Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa, Jul. 3, 1977, OAU Doc. 
CM/817 (XXIX), Annex II Rev.3 [hereinafter OAU Convention]. 
86 Green Paper, supra note 78, at ¶¶ 7–8; OAU Convention, supra note 85. 
87 Sarah V. Percy, Mercenaries: Strong Norm, Weak Law, 61 INT’L ORG. 367, 369 (2007). 
88 Id. at 368. 

 

22 

fight for the acceptable motivations of “patriotism or ideology.”89 Percy also notes that 

mercenaries’ financial motive is more important to their repugnance than is their foreignness, 

noting that various foreign volunteer fighters are seldom considered mercenaries.90 Percy traces 

the norm against mercenaries back to the late-19th century, the point at which modern states 

ceased employing mercenaries in favor of domestic professionalized forces, drawing on evidence 

from state practice in the 1960s that shows states treated that decade’s mercenary activities in 

Africa as an illegitimate breach of such a norm—clearly predating both Article 47 and the 

Mercenary Convention, of 1979 and 1989, respectively.91 

Percy’s articulation of a strong norm against using mercenaries supports the view that 

using private force against pirates is objectionable, even if that norm is reflected poorly in the 

official instruments of international law.  

D.  Somali Law 

One principal reason for the growth of Somali piracy is, of course, the lack significant 

law-enforcement capacity since the central government’s collapse in 1991.92 Both of Somalia’s 

main pirate havens, Eyl and Harardhere, are clearly outside the reach of the TFG. Eyl is situated 

in Somalia’s northeastern semi-autonomous Puntland region, and Harardhere is along the central 

coast. These towns would be the likely focus on land of an offensive against organized pirate 

gangs. Although the popular media frequently portrays Somalia as completely lawless, Puntland 

and Somaliland are comparatively stable, with functioning judicial systems,93 and Xeer, a 

                                                 
89 Id. at 371. 
90 Id. at 372. 
91 Id. at 372–74. 
92 Somalia, CIA WORLD FACTBOOK, supra note 4, Introduction. 
93 See Mohamed Olad Hassan, 7 Somali pirates sentenced to life in jail, FOX NEWS, Apr. 28, 
2008 (Puntland court sentences pirates after capture by regional militia); but see Gunmen kill 

 

23 

customary law system, is in widespread use throughout the country.94 However, as a community-

based system, dealing with foreign mercenary soldiers from the other side of the world is far 

outside Xeer’s scope. Further, even if Puntland and Somaliland were to receive foreign 

assistance to build their judicial and law-enforcement capacity, as they have requested,95 the 

overall situation in Somalia suggests that pirates would merely relocate elsewhere. 

E.  International Human Rights Law 

Because no other rights are possible without it, the most important human right of all is 

the right to life, which is recognized by the key instruments of human rights protection. It is the 

first right guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which declares, “Everyone 

has the right to life, liberty and security of person.”96 Similarly, the International Covenant on 

Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) states that “[e]very human being has the inherent right to life. 

This right shall be protected by law. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life.”97 The 

American Convention on Human Rights states, “Every person has the right to have his life 

respected. This right shall be protected by law…No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his 

life.”98 

Although the right to life’s widespread formal recognition is relevant in the sense that it 

may be considered part of customary international law, recognition alone is not sufficient to 

guarantee that the right is enforceable against non-state actors. These treaties operate directly 

                                                 
Somalia pirate judge, BBC NEWS, Nov. 12, 2009 (Puntland judge from previous story 
murdered). Somaliland court jails 14 for piracy, AFP, May 10, 2009. 
94 Leeson, Better Off Stateless, supra note 37, at 25–26. 
95 Peter Greste, Puntland turns against Somali pirates, BBC NEWS, Jun. 1, 2009. 
96 Universal Declaration of Human Rights art. 3, Dec. 10, 1948, G.A. Res. 217A (III), U.N. Doc. 
A/810 [hereinafter UDHR]. 
97 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, art. 6(1), Dec. 16, 1966, 999 U.N.T.S. 
171 [hereinafter ICCPR]. 
98 American Convention on Human Rights, art. 4(1), Nov. 22, 1969, O.A.S. Treaty Series No. 
36, 1144 U.N.T.S. 123 [hereinafter ACHR]. 

 

24 

only on states which have agreed to them. The UDHR is, on its face, a non-binding declaration 

of a “common standard of achievement,” albeit one meant for “all peoples and all nations.”99 

Although the ICCPR and ACHR oblige signatory states to protect those rights they specify, this 

does not make either treaty itself binding on non-state actors, and leaves rights enforcement up to 

states, whose motivation and capacity to prosecute violations vary widely.100 

F.  Domestic Law: The Alien Tort Statute 

The Alien Tort Statute (ATS) provides U.S. federal-court jurisdiction over tort claims by 

aliens for torts “committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the United States.”101  

Recent ATS decisions have arisen primarily in the human-rights context, and have 

required that the defendant have been a “state actor” at the time of the tort. For example, in 

Filartiga v. Pena-Irala, the Second Circuit held that the ATS provided jurisdiction for a victim’s 

family’s tort case against a policeman (now living in the U.S.) who had tortured the victim 

abroad.102 For two reasons, the decision turned on the fact that the defendant was a state actor at 

the time of the offense. First, acting under color of law was an element of the particular offense 

involved (official torture under customary international law).103 Second, the Court construed 

human rights as protecting individuals against governments, as opposed to other individuals.104 

Although finding an ATS defendant to be a state actor is necessary for many types of 

claims, it is not required for all. This is because the ATS provides jurisdiction for any 

“tort…committed in violation of the law of nations.” State action is merely an element of the 

                                                 
99 UDHR, supra note 96, at pmbl. 
100 ICCPR, supra note 97, art. 2; ACHR, supra note 97, art. 1. 
101 28 U.S.C. § 1350 [hereinafter ATS]. 
102 Filartiga v. Pena-Irala, 630 F.2d 876 (2d Cir. 1980). 
103 Id. at 882–84 (“…we conclude that official torture is now prohibited by the law of nations”). 
104 Id. at 885 (“…international law confers fundamental rights upon all people vis-à-vis their own 
governments”). 

 

25 

underlying tort—not an element of the ATS itself. In Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, the Supreme 

Court narrowed the ATS’ application to a “handful of international law cum common law claims 

understood in 1789,”105 including “piracy, crimes against peace, war crimes, and crimes against 

humanity.”106 The inclusion of piracy in this list is key. Because piracy is a universally-

recognized crime under customary international law107 (entirely distinct from human-rights 

issues)—and is not perpetrated by states, requiring state action for piracy claims makes no sense. 

Therefore, a piracy victim may sue his attackers in tort in U.S. federal court under the ATS. 

As discussed above, a PMC attack against pirates, if not expressly authorized by a state, 

would itself constitute piracy under UNCLOS,108 and would therefore satisfy the “in violation of 

the law of nations or a treaty of the United States” prong of the ATS.109 See supra Part IV.B. If a 

state authorized the PMC attack, then the victim could use that authorization to prove the state-

action element of a human-rights tort. If there was no authorization, the victim could allege 

piracy itself as a tort, bypassing the state-action requirement. Either way, then, the ATS would 

provide jurisdiction in a Somali pirate’s case against his PMC attackers. 

Where international law provides a broader right created after 1789, one must look 

beyond the Alien Tort Statute for jurisdiction. For example, the U.S. implementation of the 

                                                 
105 Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542 U.S. 692, 712 (2004). 
106 Jessica Priselac, Comment, The Requirement of State Action in Alien Tort Statute Claims: 
Does Sosa Matter?, 21 EMORY INT’L L. REV. 789, 792 (2007). 
107 Id. 
108 UNCLOS, supra note 69, arts. 101, 107. 
109 Although the U.S. is not a party to UNCLOS, “it appears to be satisfied with all aspects of the 
Convention except for the deep seabed portion of the text.” Jonathan I. Charney, The United 
States and the Law of the Sea after UNCLOS III: The Impact of General International Law, 46 
LAW & CONTEMP. PROBS. 37 (1983). There is no reason to believe the United States’ practice in 
piracy would deviate from the UNCLOS rules it has impliedly endorsed with its votes on the 
Security Council, and which rules are in any event functionally identical to those in the older 
Convention on the High Seas to which it is a party. See supra note 75, arts. 15, 21. 

 

26 

Hostages Convention does not limit the offense to state actors.110 However, it only creates a 

criminal offense, rather than a private right of action. If the government declines to prosecute, the 

victim has no private right of action under the Convention or the Supreme Court’s construction 

of the Alien Tort Statute. 

G.  International Humanitarian Law 

International humanitarian law (“IHL”), or the law of armed conflict (“LOAC”), is a rich 

body of law best known for the Geneva Conventions, but which traces its roots to the Lieber 

Code developed during the U.S. Civil War.111 Before exploring it, however, a threshold question 

must be answered: does international humanitarian law apply at all to transnational violence 

without any state combatants? 

IHL distinguishes between two forms of armed conflict: international armed conflict and 

non-international armed conflict (or “armed conflict not of an international character,” as the 

Geneva Conventions describe it). Purely private transnational violence fits neither category 

neatly, however. Such conflict crosses international borders, a characteristic of international 

armed conflict, but involves no states as combatants; international armed conflict is typically 

between states. Non-international armed conflict essentially means civil war, or a conflict 

between state and non-state combatants. Although neither category fits perfectly, transnational 

non-state violence is more like non-international armed conflict because of the major role of at 

least one non-state actor.112 

                                                 
110 18 U.S.C. § 1203. 
111 General Orders No. 100, in RICHARD SHELLY HARTIGAN, LIEBER’S CODE AND THE LAW OF 
WAR (Precedent 1983), available at The Avalon Project, Yale Law School, 
http://avalon.law.yale.edu/19th_century/lieber.asp (last visited Jun. 10, 2010) [hereinafter Lieber 
Code]. 
112 Some authors have characterized aspects of the United States’ efforts against terrorist non-
state actors as international armed conflict. See, e.g., John Cerone, Status of Detainees in 

 

27 

In substance, the law of non-international armed conflict is a very small subset of IHL. 

Only Common Article 3 and Protocol II (if ratified by the state combatant) apply to non-

international armed conflict.113 POW rules do not apply, and combatants may be prosecuted as 

criminals instead of enjoying combatant immunity. Additionally, because there is no state party 

in purely private transnational violence, not even Additional Protocol II would apply—leaving 

only Common Article 3 to protect combatants. 

Common Article 3, which purports to be non-derogable, protects “[p]ersons taking no 

active part in the hostilities, including members of armed forces who have laid down their arms 

and those placed ‘hors de combat’ by sickness, wounds, detention, or any other cause” from 

inhumane treatment. Article 3(1) absolutely prohibits four specific categories of conduct: 

(a) violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel 

treatment and torture; 

(b) taking of hostages; 

(c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading 

treatment; 

                                                 
International Armed Conflict, and their Protection in the Course of Criminal Proceedings, ASIL 
INSIGHT, n.1 (Jan. 2002), http://www.asil.org/insigh81.cfm. Although its reasoning is not entirely 
clear, the Supreme Court appeared to reject this view as to alleged Al Qaeda members captured 
in Afghanistan, holding instead that Common Article 3 protected them. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 
548 U.S. 557, 630–31 (2006). 
113 Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War art. 3, Aug. 12, 1949, 6 
U.S.T. 3316, 75 U.N.T.S. 135 [hereinafter Common Article 3]; Protocol Additional to the 
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-
International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II) art. 1, Jun. 8, 1977, 1125 U.N.T.S. 609, 26 I.L.M. 
568 [hereinafter Protocol II]. 

 

28 

(d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous 

judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial 

guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples.114 

PMC attacks on pirates would constitute murder under Article 3(1)(a). Because piracy is a crime 

under the law of nations, and because some states impose the death penalty for piracy, such 

attacks, if construed as punishment for the crime of piracy, could also constitute extrajudicial 

executions under Article 3(1)(d). 

 

The remaining question, then, is whether pirates qualify as “[p]ersons taking no active 

part in the hostilities” at all. There are two parts to this question: first, whether there are 

“hostilities”; and second, whether the pirates are “taking no active part” in them. “Hostilities” 

and “armed conflict,” although terms of art in IHL, lack universally accepted definitions.115 

Determining whether any incident of armed violence rises to the level of “armed conflict” is both 

fact intensive and often subjective, especially for determinations of non-international armed 

conflict.116  

The hypothetical scenario presented in this paper, a PMC attacking Somali pirates, is 

most likely not an “armed conflict” because (1) both sides’ goals are primarily economic, not 

political; (2) although the PMC has military objectives against pirates, the same is not true of the 

pirates; and (3) there is no overall umbrella group or political movement behind the pirates; and 

(4) piracy is defined clearly by international law as a crime, not as an act of war. These factors 

were quite different in the U.S.’ early conflict with the Barbary pirates, in which piracy was used 

as an instrument of state by three Barbary powers, Tripoli, Algiers and Tunis, which, “although 

                                                 
114 Common Article 3, supra note 113. 
115 Jelena Pejić, Status of armed conflicts, in PERSPECTIVES ON THE ICRC STUDY ON CUSTOMARY 
INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW, supra note 57, at 79. 
116 Id. 

 

29 

nominally satraps of the Ottoman Empire, acted autonomously.”117 The Barbary pirates’ dual 

goals were to gain from taking ships, and to coerce states into paying tribute to the Barbary 

powers.118 Because of these differences, the Barbary conflict would qualify as armed conflict, 

but violence between a PMC and modern Somali pirates would not. 

Even if there were “hostilities,” one would be hard pressed to find pirate victims of a 

PMC attack to be “taking no active part” in them. It seems, then, that international humanitarian 

law would not apply to purely private transnational violence, at least in the form presented by a 

PMC attack on individual pirates. 

V.  Accountability for Private Military Force 

Dickinson addresses concerns about accountability for private military forces,119 which 

are illustrated in the anti-piracy context by a late-March 2010 pirate attack on the MV Almezaan. 

Armed private security guards aboard the Almezaan returned fire, killing one pirate—the first 

known killing by private security forces of a pirate.120 The six surviving pirates were released the 

next day “because the captain of the ship they were accused of attacking declined to identify 

them for the purposes of legal action.”121  

Although the Almezaan’s captain may have had legitimate reasons not to cooperate, the 

incident raises the specter of a code of silence. Although courts would likely void contract terms 

requiring sailors to not cooperate with investigations into killings by private security teams as 

                                                 
117 Hamdan Amicus Brief, supra note 8, at 4. 
118 Id. at 4 and n. 7. 
119 Laura Dickinson, Filartiga’s Legacy in an Era of Military Privatization, 37 RUTGERS L. J. 
703 (2006) (arguing that human-rights tort claims have a better chance of holding government 
contractors accountable than do legal actions against government employees). 
120 Alan Cowell, In First, Private Guards Kill Somali Pirate, N.Y. TIMES, Mar. 24, 2010. 
121 Alan Cowell, Pirate Suspects Are Released by Naval Force, N.Y. TIMES, Mar. 25, 2010. 

 

30 

contrary to public policy,122 the parties have strong incentives toward silence regardless of the 

formal terms of their contract. Individual sailors have little incentive to cooperate with an 

investigation that might result in murder prosecutions against security guards who saved them 

from being taken hostage (or worse) by pirates. Refusing to cooperate deprives a prosecution of 

either the security guards or the pirates of key witnesses, with the end result—as in the Almezaan 

attack—of impunity for both the security guards and the surviving pirates. Shipping companies 

have a similarly strong incentive to not cooperate with investigating authorities: security 

contractors might refuse to work for shippers who violate the code of silence, or charge them 

more. 

A code of silence could also shield serious human rights violations. Although most 

vessels report an attack immediately, a captain might opt not to report if he believed his private 

security team could easily overpower the attackers. This decision might be based on subjective 

malice and intent to kill pirates; but it might also be a purely rational economic decision. If the 

attack can be suppressed quickly, a captain opting not to report the attack could continue and 

arrive in port on time. If, on the other hand, he reported the attack, then international naval forces 

would respond and investigate, a process that would eat into the ship’s schedule. If the captain 

does not take into account the value of pirates’ lives, his most rational decision might be to kill 

them, keep quiet, and keep moving. 

VI. The Normative Question: Should Private Industry Be Allowed to Kill Pirates? 

Somali piracy presents a unique nexus of problems: actors based in a failed state, attacks 

in international waters beyond states’ territorial jurisdictions, lack of leverage in ransom 

negotiations, and very high costs for apprehending pirates at sea and prosecuting them. Although 

                                                 
122 See Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 178 (1981). 

 

31 

largely undertaken for economic reasons, and with very low actual losses of life, some crew 

members do die every year, and the potential for escalation and greater casualties remains. 

Because the international community’s legal and military responses to date have had such a 

minor impact, and because the full range of legally possible alternatives offers little hope of 

greater success, actors in the maritime shipping and insurance industries will be increasingly 

attracted to illegal measures. As discussed above, the legal risks presented today by the offensive 

option are high enough to deter it. But should this be the case? Under these circumstances, 

should national and international law allow private actors to wield violence against pirates? This 

section addresses that normative question. 

A.  Should There Be a Piracy Exception to the Fundamental Right to Life? 

Gopalan notes that international law’s failure to stop Somali piracy “has created a 

perverse incentive to kill rather than prosecute,” and argues that a program of targeted killing of 

pirates is justified.123 Gopalan quotes UN Security Council Resolution 1851, which authorizes 

the use of force against pirates under Chapter VII of the UN Charter. This support is misplaced, 

however, because Gopalan ignores the proviso that “any measures undertaken pursuant to the 

authority of this paragraph shall be undertaken consistent with applicable international 

humanitarian and human rights law.”124 As discussed above, the fundamental human right to life 

allows few exceptions, and preemptive self-defense or defense of property—no matter how 

valuable—are not among them. 

Despite the flaws in their legal reasoning, arguments such as Gopalan’s have innate 

appeal and resonate with the public. Comments to piracy news stories frequently decry the 

inefficacy of current approaches and call for killing pirates with no legal process at all. After the 

                                                 
123 Gopalan, supra note 42. 
124 S.C. Res. 1851, supra note 65. 

 

32 

recent killing of a pirate by private security contractors, one blog covering the private military 

industry began its coverage thus: “Excellent. This is yet again the kind of stuff that will give 

today’s pirates a pause [sic] next time they want to attack a boat.”125 

In years past, many offenses were punishable by death, including piracy. Congress 

adopted the death penalty for piracy as early as 1819.126 Justice Story explored the history of the 

international law of piracy, quoting one Italian jurist who wrote, “every nation has a right to 

pursue, and exterminate [pirates], without any declaration of war.”127 At that time, the United 

States’ early experience with the Barbary Corsairs would have been fresh in the Court’s 

experience, and the majority had little trouble upholding a death sentence. Lord Coke wrote, 

“with professed pirates there is no state of peace, they are the enemies of every country, and at 

all times, and therefore are universally subject to the extreme rights of war”—in other words, 

summary execution of pirates was the norm.128 

But should there be a piracy exception to the strong rules and norm against extrajudicial 

killing? Given the strength and clarity of the prohibition against extrajudicial killing—which is 

unequivocally non-derogable for anything beyond self-defense—the obvious answer is no. 

On the other hand, many facts underlying piracy work against this absolute position. 

Because they sail from predictable locations with unusual equipment (e.g., weapons and ship-

boarding gear such as ladders), with reasonable efforts, pirates could be identified with precision 

while they are at sea even before they engage in acts of piracy. Given the absence of innocent 

civilians or property at sea, collateral damage there is especially unlikely, assuming the attacks 

                                                 
125 Maritime Security: Private Security Repels An Assault, One Pirate Killed, Feral Jundi, Mar. 
25, 2010, http://feraljundi.com/2010/03/25/maritime-security-private-security-repels-an-assault-
one-pirate-killed/. 
126 United States v. Smith, 18 U.S. 153, 154 (1820). 
127 Id. at 163 (quoting Azuni). 
128 Whatley, supra note 1, at 549 (citations omitted). 

 

33 

occur before the pirates take hostages.129 Further, pirates themselves routinely violate the human 

rights of their hostages, notably the right to be free from arbitrary detention and the right to 

life.130 In fact, the very act of hostage-taking is a denial of the hostage’s right to life. Unlike state 

combatants, or even many non-state combatants, pirates fail to give reciprocal recognition to the 

human and humanitarian rights of their hostages. Historically, pirates were regarded as 

“enem[ies] of the human race”131—a categorization akin to a perpetrator of modern crimes 

against humanity. Finally, the culpability of men in a swarm of fast boats approaching merchant 

vessels with assault rifles, rocket-propelled grenades, and ladders is not seriously in question. 

Absent evidentiary problems, it is difficult to foresee a scenario under which fair judicial 

proceedings would result in a not-guilty verdict for someone aboard such a boat.132 

When so many of the circumstances militating for full human-rights enforcement are 

lacking, the arguments for full enforcement of suspected pirates’ human rights lose much of their 

force. However, given the extraordinarily strong language setting out the fundamental human 

right to life in the UDHR, ICCPR, and other legal instruments, a return to summary execution of 

pirates at sea seems out of the question. 

B.  How Much Process are Pirates Due? 

One principal objection to extrajudicial killings is that they constitute a deprivation of life 

and liberty without sufficient process. But how much process is sufficient, and do pirates require 

                                                 
129 However, pirates might react to targeted killings by embarking already-held hostages as 
human shields on all their ships. 
130 See UDHR, supra note 96, at art. 9; ICCPR, supra note 97, arts. 9(1) (right to be free from 
arbitrary detention) and 6(1) (right to life). Hostage-taking is also an offense under the 
International Convention Against the Taking of Hostages, Dec. 17, 1979, G.A. Res. 34/146, U.N. 
Doc. A/34/46, T.I.A.S. No. 11081, 1316 U.N.T.S. 205 [hereinafter “Hostages Convention”]. 
131 Smith, 18 U.S. at 161. 
132 This also assumes the participants are adults. Suspected pirates might raise defenses that they 
are minors. See, e.g., Accused Somali pirate to be tried as adult, MSNBC, Apr. 21, 2009, 
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/30313755. 

 

34 

or deserve as much process as others? Common Article 3 provides some guidance, requiring that 

states “afford[] all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized 

peoples.”133  

However, knowing exactly which “judicial guarantees” are “recognized as indispensable 

by civilized peoples” is far from simple. The Supreme Court addressed this issue in Hamdan v. 

Rumsfeld.134 Justice Stevens looked to customary international law to establish a floor for due 

process to be afforded to prisoners of war, namely that the accused be present when any evidence 

is given against him.135 However, because Justice Kennedy declined to reach the merits of 

whether the military commission at issue satisfied Common Article 3,136 the Court did not reach 

a majority opinion on that question. In dissent, Justice Thomas rejected Justice Stevens’ position 

on Common Article 3, arguing that the commission need not function like a court-martial, a 

premise on which the majority proceeded, and that Common Article 3’s “nebulous standards” 

were “easily” satisfied.137 

C.  The Law of Armed Conflict’s Prohibition on Targeted Killings 

The prohibition on targeted killings in the law of armed conflict is generally credited to 

Francis Lieber and the Code he developed for the Union Army at Lincoln’s request during the 

U.S. Civil War.138 Article 148 of the Lieber Code, which prohibits assassination, reads: 

                                                 
133 Common Article 3, supra note 113. 
134 Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006). 
135 Id. at 633–35 (Stevens, J., plurality opinion) (finding Guantánamo military commissions 
violated Common Article 3 for failing to provide adequate “judicial guarantees” of due process 
under customary international law). 
136 Id. at 643– 46, 653–54 (Kennedy, J., concurring) (agreeing that court-martial is baseline for 
due process from which deviation must be justified, but not reaching construction of Common 
Article 3). 
137 Id. at 719–24 (Thomas, J., dissenting). 
138 MICHAEL GROSS, MORAL DILEMMAS OF MODERN WAR 100 (Cambridge U. Press 2010).  

 

35 

The law of war does not allow proclaiming either an individual 

belonging to the hostile army, or a citizen, or a subject of the 

hostile government, an outlaw, who may be slain without trial by 

any captor, any more than the modern law of peace allows such 

intentional outlawry; on the contrary, it abhors such outrage. The 

sternest retaliation should follow the murder committed in 

consequence of such proclamation, made by whatever authority. 

Civilized nations look with horror upon offers of rewards for the 

assassination of enemies as relapses into barbarism.139 

Underlying Lieber’s prohibition on assassination (or targeted killings in contemporary 

parlance) is the proposition that combatants in armed conflict, unless guilty of atrocities, should 

not be treated as criminals either during or after hostilities. Instead, they should be treated with a 

“presumption of innocence,” meaning that “no soldier faces arrest, trial, and punishment for 

killing enemy soldiers.” This proposition, like the Geneva Conventions’ prohibition against 

giving no quarter, is premised on a desire to avoid a cycle of escalating atrocities.140 

 

Although pirates are unlikely to agree to a reciprocal formal code of conduct, neither 

Lieber nor Lincoln expected the Confederacy to adopt the Lieber Code. Still, the Code had an 

important signaling function analogous to modern human-rights and humanitarian law norms. 

One reason that pirate attacks and hostage-holding are so infrequently lethal is the pirates’ strong 

incentive to remain within the bounds of these norms so as to avoid being put outside those 

                                                 
139 Lieber Code, supra note 111, art. 148. 
140 GROSS, supra note 138, at 102. See also Anthony Rogers, Combatant status, in PERSPECTIVES 
ON THE ICRC STUDY ON CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW, supra note 57, at 
304 (noting recognition of the “non-penal character of [POW] internment” throughout the 
development of the customary laws of armed conflict). 

 

36 

norms themselves. In other words, pirates understand that any escalation of violence cuts both 

ways, and they are enormously outmatched in firepower. A program of targeted killings of 

pirates would undermine this equilibrium and likely lead to more lethal pirate attacks and more 

dead hostages. 

Piracy differs significantly from the situations envisaged by Lieber or the drafters of the 

Geneva Conventions in that it does not rise to the level of armed conflict. Somali pirates are 

civilian criminals, not combatants. Under the laws of war, civilians may not be targeted unless 

they participate directly in hostilities in an armed conflict—and therefore, where, as in the piracy 

context, there is no armed conflict, civilians may not be targeted for killing.141 

D.  Discretionary Prosecution of Maritime Mercenaries 

Because they take hostages, Somali pirates would be subject to the Hostages Convention. 

Article 8 of that treaty states that whenever any offender is “found” in a state, that state is 

“obliged” to prosecute him regardless of where the offense took place.142 A state’s duty under 

UNCLOS is far less clear because it specifies only that “[a]ll States shall cooperate to the fullest 

possible extent in the repression of piracy…”143 At first glance, the SUA Convention appears to 

impose a duty to prosecute suspected offenders. However, a closer reading discloses a serious 

loophole allowing states essentially unfettered discretion. Article 7(1) states that, “Upon being 

satisfied that the circumstances so warrant, any State Party in the territory of which the 

offender…is present shall…take him into custody…for such time as is necessary to enable any 

criminal or extradition proceeding to be instituted.”144 How to determine which “circumstances” 

                                                 
141 Michael N. Schmitt, The law of targeting, in PERSPECTIVES ON THE ICRC STUDY ON 
CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW, supra note 57, at 141–42. 
142 Hostages Convention, supra note 130, art. 8. 
143 UNCLOS, supra note 69, art. 100 (emphasis added) 
144 SUA Convention, supra note 70, art. 7(1). 

 

37 

would “warrant” prosecution is not specified, and the text implies that a state’s satisfaction to 

that end may be entirely subjective. Although the track record for prosecution of Somali pirates 

is far from stellar,145 in the case of a PMC attack itself constituting piracy or a SUA offense, such 

a subjective standard could even more easily result in impunity. 

The UN Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime146 (hereinafter “TOC 

Convention”) creates powerful tools for prosecuting transnational crime. Substantively, instead 

of enumerating specific offenses, the TOC Convention operates on any crime with a domestic 

sentence of four years or more, creates conspiracy offenses, and outlaws participation in 

organized-crime groups.147  Procedurally, the TOC Convention facilitates cooperation between 

authorities of different states, including extradition.148 

For example, because piracy is recognized as one of the core international crimes and 

carries heavy punishment worldwide, Somali pirates would clearly qualify as “organized 

criminal groups” committing “serious crime,” and therefore would be subject to the TOC 

Convention.149 Perhaps less intuitively, however, a PMC chartered to fight piracy could just as 

easily find itself ensnared by the TOC Convention. So long as it intended to kill, any modern 

firm would satisfy the TOC Convention’s definition of an “organized criminal group.”150 If the 

PMC is hired to kill pirates, its employees could be charged with murder—which, in all 

likelihood, carries a maximum sentence greater than four years in every state party to the TOC 

Convention. Thus, the many complexities of humanitarian law, human rights, and mercenaries 

                                                 
145 See supra Part II.B. 
146 United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime Nov. 15, 2000, U.N. 
Doc. A/55/383, T.I.A.S. 13127 [hereinafter “TOC Convention”]. 
147 Id. arts. 2(b), 3, 5. 
148 Id. arts. 16, 18–27. 
149 Id. arts. 2, 3. 
150 Id. 

 

38 

are potentially moot; a domestic prosecutor in any involved state could invoke the TOC 

Convention’s procedural advantages and proceed along the familiar lines of a murder case. 

Conclusions 

The world is afflicted with many grave threats and problems, but today, maritime piracy 

is not among them. Over the last several years, the international community has spent hundreds 

of millions of dollars waging a losing battle against small bands of Somali pirates who have 

inflicted substantial economic damage but actually killed only a handful of sailors. Because they 

do not work, states should abandon their current counter-piracy policies and instead direct their 

attention and resources to areas with better prospects for lasting impact—economic and political 

development on land in Somalia, for example.  

Clearly, however, something must be done about the explosion of Somali piracy. Because 

modern piracy is largely an economic crime, and because states have proven ill-suited to stop it 

with any of the political, legal, or military tools thus far deployed, economic actors (i.e., the 

shipping companies) should be given greater leeway to respond effectively. In the Somali piracy 

context, this means using force—at the very least to defend against attacks in progress 

However, because pirates are unlikely to respond to anything short of major violence, the 

next choice is stark: either stop at defensive force—which has so far provided little deterrence—

or grant PMCs authority to strike pirate enterprises preemptively. This boils down to an easily 

stated, but troubling question: should the international community accept to the economic cost of 

piracy (which continues to rise), or should it accept the humanitarian costs of authorizing private 

military force against it? If states choose the latter option, they would be essentially reverting to 

the maritime law of centuries past. To do so today, however, they must create an explicit 

exemption to the substantial body of human-rights and humanitarian law that has developed 

 

39 

since the world last grappled with large-scale maritime piracy. Although these bodies of law do 

not provide clear or complete coverage of private transnational violence, the trend toward greater 

coverage is unmistakable, and the human right to life is one of international law’s strongest 

positive rights. Without a clear exemption, any authority conferred on PMCs to fight piracy 

would be largely rhetorical because PMCs would rightly fear prosecution under these legal 

regimes, especially given the strong norm against mercenarism.151 Whether to grant a piracy 

exemption to the right to life depends on whether one views piracy as qualitatively different from 

other crimes. Historically, piracy has been treated differently from other crimes,152 but whether 

that remains true today is less clear. That the Security Council has acted repeatedly under 

Chapter VII, and authorized states to go on the offensive,153 suggests that it may. 

                                                 
151 See supra Part IV.C. 
152 See Smith, 18 U.S. at 161 (characterizing pirates as “enem[ies] of the human race,”); The 
Marianna Flora, 24 U.S. 1, 40 (1825) (“Pirates may, without doubt, be lawfully captured on the 
ocean by the public or private ships of every nation; for they are, in truth, the common enemies 
of all mankind, and, as such, are liable to the extreme rights of war.”). 
153 S.C. Res. 1846, supra note 51. 

 

40 

